Significance
See also: English-speaking world and Anglosphere

Modern English, sometimes described as the first global lingua franca,[14][15]
is the dominant language or in some instances even the required international
language of communications, science, business, aviation, entertainment, radio
and diplomacy.[16] Its spread beyond the British Isles began with the growth
of the British Empire, and by the late nineteenth century its reach was truly
global.[17] Following the British colonisation of North America, it became the
dominant language in the United States and in Canada. The growing economic and
cultural influence of the United States and its status as a global superpower
since World War II have significantly accelerated the language's spread across
the planet.[15]

A working knowledge of English has become a requirement in a number of fields,
occupations and professions such as medicine and computing; as a consequence
over a billion people speak English to at least a basic level (see English
language learning and teaching). It is also one of six official languages of
the United Nations.

Linguists such as David Crystal recognise that one impact of this massive
growth of English, in common with other global languages, has been to reduce
native linguistic diversity in many parts of the world, most particularly in
Australasia and North America, and its huge influence continues to play an
important role in language attrition.[18] Similarly, historical linguists,
aware of the complex and fluid dynamics of language change, are always aware
of the potential English contains through the vast size and spread of the
communities that use it and its natural internal variety, such as in its
creoles and pidgins, to produce a new family of distinct languages over
time.[19]
History
Main article: History of the English language

English is a West Germanic language that originated from the Anglo-Frisian and
Lower Saxon dialects brought to Britain by Germanic settlers and Roman
auxiliary troops from various parts of what is now northwest Germany, Denmark
and the Netherlands in the 5th century. One of these Germanic tribes was the
Angles,[20] who may have come from Angeln, and Bede wrote that their whole
nation came to Britain,[21] leaving their former land empty. The names
'England' (from Engla land "Land of the Angles") and English (Old English
Englisc) are derived from the name of this tribe.

The Anglo-Saxons began invading around 449 AD from the regions of Denmark and
Jutland.[22][23] Before the Anglo-Saxons arrived in England the native
population spoke Brythonic, a Celtic language.[24] Although the most
significant changes in dialect occurred after the Norman invasion of 1066, the
language retained its name and the pre-Norman invasion dialect is now known as
Old English.[25]

Initially, Old English was a diverse group of dialects, reflecting the varied
origins of the Anglo-Saxon Kingdoms of Great Britain.[26] One of these
dialects, Late West Saxon, eventually came to dominate. One of the most
prevalent forces in the evolution of the English language was the Roman
Catholic Church. Beginning with the Rule of St Benedict in 530 and continuing
until the Dissolution of the Monasteries in 1536, the Roman Catholic Church
instructed monasteries and Catholic officials like Augustine of Canterbury to
preserve intellectual culture within their schools, scriptoria, and libraries.

During the Middle Ages, the Catholic Church had a monopoly on intellectual
property in British society, which they used to exert great influence on the
English language.[citation needed] Catholic monks mainly wrote or copied text
in Latin, the prevalent Medieval lingua franca of Europe.[27] When monks
occasionally wrote in the vernacular, it was common to substitute or derive
English-like words from Latin to describe or refer to things in which there
was no English word. Extensive vocabulary, a derivative of Latin vocabularium,
in the English language largely comprises Latin word derivatives. It is
believed that the intellectual elite in British society over the years
perpetuated vocabulary that Catholic monks contributed to English;
furthermore, they continued the custom of deriving new words from Latin long
after the waning of Catholic Church.[citation needed]

Old English vernacular was also influenced by two waves of invasion. The first
was by language speakers of the North Germanic branch of the Germanic family;
they conquered and colonised parts of the British Isles in the 8th and 9th
centuries. The second was the Normans in the 11th century, who spoke Old
Norman and developed an English variety of this called Anglo-Norman. (Over the
centuries, this lost the specifically Norman element under the influence of
Parisian French and, later, of English, eventually turning into a distinctive
dialect of Anglo-French.) These two invasions caused English to become "mixed"
to some degree (though it was never a truly mixed language in the strict
linguistic sense of the word; mixed languages arise from the cohabitation of
speakers of different languages, who develop a hybrid tongue for basic
communication).

Cohabitation with the Scandinavians resulted in a lexical supplementation of
the Anglo-Frisian core of English; the later Norman occupation led to the
grafting onto that Germanic core of a more elaborate layer of words from the
Romance languages. This Norman influence entered English largely through the
courts and government. Thus, English developed into a "borrowing" language of
great flexibility and a huge vocabulary.

With the emergence and spread of the British Empire, the English language was
adopted in North America, India, Africa, Australia and other regions. The
emergence of the United States as a superpower has also helped the spread of
English.
Classification and related languages

The English language belongs to the Anglo-Frisian sub-group of the West
Germanic branch of the Germanic Family, a member of the Indo-European
languages. The closest living relatives of English are the Scots language,
spoken primarily in Scotland and parts of Northern Ireland, and Frisian. As
Scots is viewed by some linguists to be a group of English dialects rather
than a separate language, Frisian is often considered to be the closest living
relative.

After Scots and Frisian come those Germanic languages which are more distantly
related, namely the non-Anglo-Frisian West Germanic languages (Low German,
Dutch, Afrikaans, High German), and the North Germanic languages (Swedish,
Danish, Norwegian, Icelandic, and Faroese). With the exception of Scots, and
on an extremely basic level, Frisian, none of the other languages is mutually
intelligible with English, due in part to the divergences in lexis, syntax,
semantics, and phonology, and to the isolation afforded to the English
language by the British Isles, although some such as Dutch do show strong
affinities with English. This isolation has allowed English and Scots to
develop independently of the Continental Germanic languages and their
influences over time.[28]

Lexical differences with the other Germanic languages can arise from several
causes, such as natural semantic drift caused by isolation, and heavy usage in
English of words taken from Latin (for example, "exit", vs. Dutch uitgang)
(literally "out-gang" with "gang" as in "gangway") and French "change" vs.
German Änderung, "movement" vs. German Bewegung (literally "othering" and
"be-way-ing" ("proceeding along the way")). Preference of one synonym over
another can also cause a differentiation in lexis, even where both words are
Germanic (for instance, both English care and German Sorge descend from
Proto-Germanic *karo and *surgo respectively, but *karo became the dominant
word in English for "care" while in German, Dutch, and Scandinavian languages,
the *surgo root prevailed. *Surgo still survives in English as sorrow).

Although the syntax of German is significantly different from that of English
and other Germanic languages, with different rules for setting up sentences
(for example, German Ich habe noch nie etwas auf dem Platz gesehen, vs.
English "I have still never seen anything in the square"), English syntax
remains extremely similar to that of the North Germanic languages, which are
believed to have influenced English syntax during the Middle English Period
(eg., Norwegian Jeg har likevel aldri sett noe i torget; Swedish Jag har ännu
aldrig sett något på torget). It is for this reason that despite a lack of
mutual intelligibility, English-speakers and Scandinavians can learn each
others' languages relatively easily.[citation needed]

Dutch syntax is intermediate between English and German (eg. Ik heb nog nooit
iets gezien op het plein). In spite of this difference, there are more
similarities between English and other Germanic languages than differences
(eg. English bring/brought/brought, Dutch brengen/bracht/gebracht, Norwegian
bringe/brakte/brakt; English eat/ate/eaten, Dutch eten/at/gegeten, Norwegian
ete/åt/ett), with the most similarities occurring between English and the
languages of the Low Countries (Dutch and Low German) and Scandinavia.

Semantic differences cause a number of false friends between English and its
relatives (eg. English time vs Norwegian time "hour"), and differences in
Phonology can obscure words which actually are genetically related ("enough"
vs. German genug, Danish nok). Sometimes both semantics and phonology are
different (German Zeit, "time", is related to English "tide", but the English
word, through a transitional phase of meaning "period"/"interval", has come
primarily to mean gravitational effects on the ocean by the moon, though the
original meaning is preserved in forms like tidings and betide, and phrases
such as to tide over).[citation needed] These differences, though minor,
preclude mutual intelligibility, yet English is still much closer to other
Germanic languages than to languages of any other family.

Finally, English has been forming compound words and affixing existing words
separately from the other Germanic languages for over 1500 years and has
different habits in that regard. For instance, abstract nouns in English may
be formed from native words by the suffixes "‑hood", "-ship", "-dom" and
"-ness". All of these have cognate suffixes in most or all other Germanic
languages, but their usage patterns have diverged, as German "Freiheit" vs.
English "freedom" (the suffix "-heit" being cognate of English "-hood", while
English "-dom" is cognate with German "-tum"). Icelandic and Faroese are other
Germanic languages which follow English in this respect, since, like English,
they developed independent of German influences.

Many written French words are also intelligible to an English speaker (though
pronunciations are often quite different) because English absorbed a large
vocabulary from Norman and French, via Anglo-Norman after the Norman Conquest
and directly from French in subsequent centuries. As a result, a large portion
of English vocabulary is derived from French, with some minor spelling
differences (word endings, use of old French spellings, etc.), as well as
occasional divergences in meaning of so-called false friends.

The pronunciation of most French loanwords in English (with exceptions such as
mirage or phrases like coup d’état) has become completely anglicised and
follows a typically English pattern of stress.[citation needed] Some North
Germanic words also entered English because of the Danish invasion shortly
before then (see Danelaw); these include words such as "sky", "window", "egg",
and even "they" (and its forms) and "are" (the present plural form of "to
be").[citation needed]
Geographical distribution
See also: List of countries by English-speaking population
[show]
v • d • e
The English-speaking world
The "Anglosphere"
English as an official language – clickable map

Dark blue: Countries and territories where English is spoken natively by a
significant population.

Light blue: Countries where English is an official language but not native.
English is also one of the official languages of the European Union. Click on
the coloured regions to view the related article.

English sometimes spoken here
 
    

    Regions where English is an official language and spoken by a significant
    population:
    Africa  
    Nigeria · Mauritius · Saint Helena · South Africa
     Americas   
     Anguilla · Antigua and Barbuda · The Bahamas · Barbados · Belize ·
     Bermuda · British Virgin Islands · Canada · Cayman Islands · Dominica ·
     Falkland Islands · Grenada · Guyana · Jamaica · Montserrat · Netherlands
     Antilles (Saba, Saint Eustatius, Saint Maarten)  · Saint Kitts and Nevis
     · Saint Lucia · Saint Vincent and the Grenadines · Trinidad and Tobago ·
     Turks and Caicos Islands · United States · United States Virgin Islands
     Asia   
     Hong Kong · Philippines · Singapore
     Europe     
     Guernsey · Isle of Man · Jersey · Malta · Republic of Ireland · United
     Kingdom
     Oceania    
     Australia · Marshall Islands · Federated States of Micronesia · Nauru ·
     New Zealand · Palau
        

        Regions where English is an official language but not widely spoken:
        Africa  
        Botswana · Cameroon · Ghana · Kenya · Lesotho · Liberia · Madagascar ·
        Malawi · Namibia · Rwanda · Sierra Leone · Sudan · Swaziland ·
        Tanzania · Uganda · Zambia · Zimbabwe
        Americas    
        Puerto Rico
        Asia    
        India · Malaysia · Pakistan
           Oceania  
           Fiji · Papua New Guinea · Solomon Islands
           English Wiktionary
           Pie chart showing the relative numbers of native English speakers
           in the major English-speaking countries of the world

           Approximately 375 million people speak English as their first
           language.[29] English today is probably the third largest language
           by number of native speakers, after Mandarin Chinese and
           Spanish.[30][31] However, when combining native and non-native
           speakers it is probably the most commonly spoken language in the
           world, though possibly second to a combination of the Chinese
           languages (depending on whether or not distinctions in the latter
           are classified as "languages" or "dialects").[6][32]

           Estimates that include second language speakers vary greatly from
           470 million to over a billion depending on how literacy or mastery
           is defined and measured.[33][34] Linguistics professor David
           Crystal calculates that non-native speakers now outnumber native
           speakers by a ratio of 3 to 1.[35]

           The countries with the highest populations of native English
           speakers are, in descending order: United States (215 million),[36]
           United Kingdom (61 million),[37] Canada (18.2 million),[38]
           Australia (15.5 million),[39] Nigeria (4 million),[40] Ireland (3.8
           million),[37] South Africa (3.7 million),[41] and New Zealand (3.6
           million) 2006 Census [42]. No figure is given for the number of
           South African native speakers, but it would be somewhere between
           the number of people who spoke English only (3,008,058) and the
           total number of English speakers (3,673,623), if one ignores the
           197,187 people who did not provide a usable answer.

           Countries such as the Philippines, Jamaica and Nigeria also have
           millions of native speakers of dialect continua ranging from an
           English-based creole to a more standard version of English. Of
           those nations where English is spoken as a second language, India
           has the most such speakers ('Indian English'). Crystal claims that,
           combining native and non-native speakers, India now has more people
           who speak or understand English than any other country in the
           world.[43][44]
